Hi all,

This is a slightly different topic to Dave's previous email, as I thought I would outline how I personally see the question of authorship and attribution in collaborative environments for use going forward. I do think this is something that the university or school should draw up sensible best practices on, but no one has done so and I've seen problems arise when things are not discussed beforehand and everyone thinks they are right, and reasonably so as there are multiple correct answers here. These are roughly how I expect things to work if I'm involved in a project with you, so it might be good for you all to know as I hope to collaborate widely. 

So, these are my observations on the paper writing process. Note, this are my opinions, you don't have to follow it. I've written it as do/don't kinda list as I might put it on my blog as advice to PhDs/ early post-docs, so it you have questions or disagree, let me know, it'd be helpful for that.

Authorship:
Acknowledgements is for people who have chatted to you over coffee, or listened to you thinking aloud in a pub, or technicians who run the lab / machines (although I have put technicians as co-authors as well). (In a PhD thesis you usually also include family who put up with you during the PhD). Acknowledgments mean nothing in terms of career progression, however, the PhD student who I spent 4 hours teaching how to write a paper and planning his first paper (not at Bristol, by the way) who failed to mention me in the final paper's acknowledgements did not impress me. One of my friends is acknowledged in about 10 of my papers as I use her editing skills and scientific reasoning for pre-review and so thank her a lot. Thanking a reviewer if they have actually given you a great idea is appropriate (not as least as which as they may well see it - fields are never as big as you think!). 
Co-authorship is for people that have been involved directly in that paper either as: a worker (doing some of the experiments/analysis), providing an intellectual contribution (it was their idea, they wrote the grant, they argued with you in group meetings on the subject, they guided you in the project), providing a material contribution (they got the grant, they provided the 'thing' you needed). If they did work for an earlier version of the paper, and that work then got cut (or shunted to the SI), they still get authorship for being involved in the project. If they gave you the device or data without which you couldn't do the work, but gave no other input, they get to go on at least one of the papers concerning that device/data (but you don't have to put them on every paper forever - my rule of thumb is if you are at least citing an earlier paper which they were on for providing it, you are probably good). If you promised them authorship for help (i.e. I offered a research technician paper credits if he were to help me with my research) they go on. 
Some fields tend to put everyone in the group on all papers, I don't like this as how can one scientist (say a female, disabled BAME one) out-compete another in the same group (say white, male, privileged) by paper credits if they must share? This seems to help the less productive and more privileged. However, I have been in groups where 3 of us were working so closely on a group of papers that were highly interrelated it made sense to put all of us as authors even though each individual paper did not include work from every author.  Also, some 'higher' journals (Nature, Science and a few others) will ask you to identify what _each_ author contributed, so this approach goes out the window if you plan to submit anything to them.
Don't sweat the order of authors, only first and last author means something different
You can help out your colleagues/friends by asking them to help you with your paper (perhaps even doing stuff you could do yourself) in order to give them paper credits.
Sometimes you may try to get someone on your paper and you give them the opportunity and they fail to take it. 
First authorship should be determined early on in the project. The worst mess I have seen (also not Bristol) was a PI who put two PhDs onto a joint project without determining who would be first author when, so they both expected to be first author on the first paper from the project.
When entering into a new collaboration with someone (especially one you don't have to do for your day to day job) talk about how and when authorship order will be decided (this sort of talk early on can 'turn people off', but it is better to outline the expectations before undertaking anything).
If you are aiming for joint work with someone else where it is likely that you will both be contributing almost the same amount of work, try to publish an even number of papers (or at least more than one) and switch first author order as well as designating you both a joint first authors, if allowed (some journals do, most don't). And don't sweat which paper is the higher impact journal, just do more research.
The first author usually writes the manuscript/most the manuscript, and deals with all the grunt work (copyright finding, submitting the paper, responding to reviewers, changing the fonts on the graphs etc), unless the first author is a professor, in which case someone else will end up doing it (in my experience this would be me). 
It's a good idea to collaborate widely, you get more papers. There's no good reason to not share ideas with colleagues - you get more papers.
If you want to start up a collaboration with someone completely new/unknown, then don't give them your current 'best' idea or a critical research task, test them out on something less important first.
Keep a list of collaborators, people at conferences, visitors etc who seem decent, so when you need to recommend reviewers or decide to run a workshop/conference you know who to email.
There are two approaches to writing papers. Either write quickly, let the reviewers tell you what to write, and accept rejection/revise and re-submit as the cost of doing business. Or, write, re-write, re-write, re-write, show to others, change all the fonts in the graphs to be the same, re-write again, hate the paper, submit and don't get rejected. I've done both. They both work.
If you think I can be helpful to you, please come and talk to me, I'm happy to help. And if there is something useful I can do, I will tell you, and we can discuss authorship dependent on what I do. I don't mind discussing stuff generally, nor discussing questions of authorship over the project, so don't feel as if were you to speak to me, I'd be demanding authorship due to intellectual input, I only expect it if I've done enough work that it is fair for me to be added. 

References
You should cite as much _relevant_ previous work as you can, nicely organised, following: summarize, synthesize, analyze, extemporize (you summarize the previous work, synthesizing it together into streams of research, analyse these as to what the field is doing/missing/needs, and then extemporize (or pontificate, ramble etc) about the question you're answering in your paper (where the field is going/what's been missed/your opinion if a review article, why the world needs your awesome research if a research article). 
You should take pride in your scholarship, it is, after all, half of what we do. (Also, if you want to get a lot of papers, it helps to know a lot from the literature, so you come up with ideas for papers, there's a lot of mileage in taking idea A from paper A and applying it to problem B from paper B).  
If your paper has either less than 20 references and/or half the references bear the names of one of your co-authors, were I to review it, I would ask you to revise and resubmit your paper with a better lit review (and there are many other reviewers like me - I am rarely reviewer number two). 
If you don't have many references, and I can find some key literature missing from your exact sub-field in less than 5 minutes on google, I would ask you to revise and resubmit your paper with a better lit review. 
If you mention what looks like an important non-ubiquitous  technique, thingymajig or approach and have zero citations for it, then as a reviewer, I will take 5 mins to do a google search. If I find one, then (you've guessed it) I'm likely to ask for a revise and resubmit. As a reviewer I won't reject good science for bad writing or scholarship; but I won't accept it either.
I've offered some of you 'pre-review' of your papers, this means I will look at your papers before you submit as if I were a reviewer and/or editor, and give you feedback. I can be helpful in this, having been an author, reviewer and editor in several fields. I'll happily do this for any of you - I consider it part of my academic duties. Note, I would not expect authorship for doing something like this. 
Even though your field is of great interest to you, and your 'thing' in the group, doesn't mean that it doesn't also belong to others in the field, some of whom you might not like, and you still have to cite them. 
As I said, these are just my opinions and you can freely ignore them. But this is the amalgamation of my experience of best (and worst!) practices from multiple postdocs and several fields.


A world top 50 university (QS Ranking 2016)